This is Brent Weldon interviewing Bill Farmer on
the subject of Vietnam. Do you acknowledge that
you're in using this for a donation to the oral
history collection for Texas A&M University?
Yes.
Could you first start when and where you were born?
I was born here in Waco, Texas in 1949, June. Did you
grow up here? Grew up in Waco. Okay. Where did you go
to school, high school? Graduated from
University High School here in Waco. Okay. Did you
go to college anywhere? Yes. I went to MCC,
graduated from Baylor University, got my
master's degree from North Texas State
University. Okay. When did you graduate? When did
you get those? Graduated from Baylor in 1974 and
received my master's in 19... 81, I believe, if I
remember correctly. And what time did you serve in
Vietnam? From September of 1968 to September of
1969. And what branch and outfit was that? Well, I
was with the United States Army. My immediate
assignment was with 378th Maintenance Company
and was TDY with 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment.
Why did you volunteer instead of waiting to be
drafted or trying to get a deferment? Well, I was 18
years old. College wasn't where I wanted to be at
that particular time. It wasn't doing too well.
And I just felt the need to go. My parents had been,
my dad had been, my uncles had been in Korea all the
way back to World War I, my grandfathers, my
cousins. I had cousins in Vietnam. I just felt like
it was where I needed to do instead of wasting my
time doing nothing. Okay. Did you feel that the
United States was right in responding by sending
troops for combat? Yes, I do. I think we were doing
the right thing. Why did you feel like that? Well,
at that time... You know, communism was a big
thing. We still had the Cold War was going on, the
threat of nuclear war, the spread of communism,
the things that you hear about all the time. Okay. I
really felt like it was the right thing to do. We
needed to stop it in Southeast Asia. Okay. Did you
feel that when you went in, did you feel that the
United States would win? Most definitely. Most
definitely. Never thought we would lose the war.
You just felt that we would never lose? Is that why?
Okay. Okay. How did you feel in response? I still
debate the fact that we lost the war. We didn't lose
the war. Congress helped us maybe, but we didn't
lose the war. How did you feel in response to
friends and acquaintances who could have gone and
didn't go? Well, I never really knew anyone who
tried to avoid the war. Some who went to school were
there that I knew of were there because they wanted
to get education. It was not to dodge the war, so
it's hard to answer that. My immediate friends...
They either went or they were in school for a real
reason, or they couldn't go for medical reasons. I
really had no one to try to dodge the war that I know
of. Oh, that's interesting.
How did you feel about the strategic bombing? Did
you feel it was effective? Well, I feel like it was
doing what it was supposed to do. I remember there
were a lot of times where we didn't have any contact
with the enemy, and I thought it was due to the
bombing. Nixon halted the bombing, I guess,
October, November 1968, somewhere there. It's
been such a long time. Immediately after that, it
wasn't long and the enemy activity picked up all
through the country, as far as I know. So, did you
feel that you were adequately trained when you got
there for what you had to do? Well, not really.
Mostly you learned from others on the job
training. I felt it was very difficult to train for
what we were doing and for the kind of war we were
fighting, because it was a whole different kind of
war. It wasn't like anything that we had done
before. Even my dad had talked about being in the
Philippines in World War II, and after we'd talked
a little bit, and he said even, it didn't sound like
it was even the same thing then, and his was a
jungle-type warfare in World War II. So I don't
know as we were trained as well as we needed to be. I
don't know if we had enough knowledge to train the
way we needed to. Until the latter part of the war,
and by the time we got to that point, it was
basically too late. So I think most of it was
on-the-job training. Okay. Did you... How did the
anti-war activism in the States, did that make you
feel... How did that make you feel while you were in
the service? Did it have any kind of impact in
Vietnam? Well, it made a lot angry, particularly
those that were probably young like I was. It
bothered us a little bit to read the newspapers, to
get a news clip or something of all this stuff that
was going on. It was bothersome. And many of the
older, what few there were, the older military
people, of course they were in the military for
life so it really bothered them that this was going
on. Was there any kind of anti-war around where you
were at? Not particularly. We had the typical
things you see in the movies, guys wearing peace
signs and you know a lot of guys would talk about
wish they were somewhere else and didn't know why
they were there and things like that but when push
came to shove everyone that I've ever been in
contact with did their job and was proud to serve.
They may not have liked being there, but they did
what they felt like they had to do.
How did you feel about Nixon's Vietnamization
policy before, during, and then after the war?
Well, it was a good goal, but it wasn't too
realistic from what little bit. You know, I don't
know that much about that kind of thing. But I do
know that most of the time, even though the
Vietnamese really tried very hard, most of them
had been fighting for so many years, it was hard for
them to, I don't know if motivated is a good word or
not, to continue the fight. Many of their troops
were very good fighters, and many of their troops
also,
I don't know, it wasn't that they were bad
fighters, it's just that they didn't, do what they
needed to do at times. It was scary for them. It was
just such a long, drawn out thing. And like I said,
we were there 10, 11, 12 years maybe, a little bit
before that with advisors, but those guys had been
fighting for 25 and 30 years. So it was hard for them
just to keep on keeping on.
How did you feel about the TV and newspaper
journalists that were over there? Well, we didn't
really have that much contact with them. They were
around here and there, but really they weren't
very, I don't know if effective is a good word. They
didn't bother us. We did our job, and they weren't
around very long. They would be there, and then
they were gone doing something else. So really
couldn't say a whole lot about it. Did they ever
interview anybody? No. They were taking pictures
more than anything else. Was that bothersome that
they took a lot of pictures or anything? No, not
necessarily, because most of the pictures they
took were at times where they weren't in the way or
where they weren't in real danger. I'm sure there
were some media people who were in situations
where it was quite dangerous, but I was never
around those that were in that situation. So my
next question was if you felt that the journalists
took away from morale at all. Would that affect you
at all? Well, we never had any. I never knew of any
that said or did anything to knock what we were
doing. They were all supportive as far as I know.
I had asked you this before, but do you feel that war
should have been declared on the records?
Well, only if they would allow the war to actually
be fought. I don't feel like, and I know many
others,
don't feel like we were allowed to fight the war. I
mean, why declare a war if you're not allowed to
fight it? You know, like it ought to be fought, put
an end to it. We're held back. So I don't see the
need. I didn't see the need, and still don't, why
there would have been a declaration of war. Maybe
it would have made Congress feel good, but... When
you're prevented from doing your job in some ways,
well, what's the use? For those in the field, it
really didn't make a difference. Right. If it had
been your decision, would you have done something
different than what was done? Like, they sent
troops, but they didn't declare war. Would you
have done something different than that if you had
had a say? Well, I don't know enough about what all
we had. But I think that we, given the opportunity,
maybe we should have declared war. And then we
could have went on in. And we needed to go ahead and
invade North Vietnam, put an end to it. So we were
fighting a defensive war rather than an
aggressive war. And we should have went on and did
what we needed to do. If it meant crossing into
North Vietnam, we needed to do that, or into
Cambodia, or Laos, or whatever. I know we were in
those areas when we weren't supposed to be, but
that should have never happened. We should have
been there if we needed to be there and go on. Now
that's a low soldier's idea. The general advice
had to look a little different, but we wanted to
win. What do you think the difference would have
made if war had been declared? Well, if we had have
declared war, we might have went ahead and did some
things that we didn't do. We might have really...
went on the aggressive rather than trying to be
fighting defensively. I don't see how you can win a
war defensively. What do you think their
objectives were for sending troops over? Well, I
think the whole thing was just to buy time so that
the Vietnamization program would work and they
could fight their own war, but that was never going
to happen. It didn't take long to really realize
that, and then we got ourselves in so deep, it seems
to me like we wouldn't quit. We wouldn't shut it
down. We wouldn't stop. There was no easy way out.
No one wanted to ever lose the war, but yet we didn't
do the things we needed to do to actually win the
war.
There was talk about use of atomic bombs. Did you
ever hear anything about this? No. How do you feel
now about the possibility of what they might have
used atomic bombs? Well, I don't know if that would
have been such a good idea. There was enough
civilians being hurt and killed and maimed and
loss of life and land and all of that. I don't know if
that would have been really good or not. That's a
hard one to call. Okay.
Did you ever see any kind of use of drugs that are now
illegal in the United States among the troops?
There was drug use. I was around drug use many
times. Some used drugs. Marijuana primarily was
the drug most used. Alcohol was used quite a bit.
But I must say that none of these things were ever
done around
me or anyone that I know of at a time when we were
involved in an operation of any kind. Those things
always happened. pursued that kind of activity,
did that when we were back at a base camp or a place of
safety or they were off duty. I know it doesn't make
it right, but they did those kinds of things. I was
around it. It was common practice. But again, I
have to emphasize, no one that I know of ever did
that at a time when it was life or death or on a
mission or operation that I know of. Okay, I
understand. Did you see a lot of strong apathy
about the war while you were in it? Well, not too
much, really. When I came home in 1969, the morale
was still pretty strong. I don't think that a lot of
the apathy, I don't really think that a lot of the
drug use really, really got bad until probably
toward the end of the war, 71, 72, 70, in those times
when it was evident that we weren't going to do
anything to win the war. We were just killing time,
trying to figure a way to come home. I understand.
How did you feel about the use of drugs around?
Well, I didn't like it. I don't use drugs, and I knew
a lot of good guys that did drugs, but they were
still, I thought, were good guys. They just had a
vice that I didn't think was proper, but again,
they were smart enough or old enough or whatever
you want to call it to do it where it did not affect
the lives of those around them as far as I know. Was
it ever bad enough where you were at that there were
combat refusals or fragging? No. No? Again, I
think a lot of that that you see in the movies or read
about, I think a lot of that came late in the war.
Later in the war. Okay.
Did you ever have any opinion about that after you
were here, hearing about the combat refusals and
the fragging that was going on? Well...
I can't see that being done. Okay, I understand. I
just don't see it happening. I know that it did in
situations, but it would be hard to make a judgment
without actually knowing that situation.
Because I know there were many times where you were
given orders or told to do things, and maybe by
someone who had only been there a short time and had
not learned the ropes, and you'd want to say, hey,
this is not how we need to do it. For the most part,
those people who were in those positions of
leadership listened to those who had been there
before. I think maybe as the war progressed toward
the end, that didn't happen like that. They didn't
listen to those who had been there. So it wasn't
unusual early, I don't think, for, say, a new
lieutenant right out of OCS to listen to an old
sergeant who'd been there six, seven, eight,
nine, maybe in their second tour, said, hey, we
need to do this a little differently. And they
would listen. You know, they were smart enough to
listen. Maybe some of these other things occurred
later. Okay, but not while you were around? No.
Okay.
What did you think about, while we're talking
about the officers, what did you think about the
careerism we talked about in our class about how
some of the officers would go in long enough to get a
promotion and then they'd be transferred six
months later? What did you think about that? Was
there a lot of that where you were at? Really, no. I
never seen too many who came in just for a while to
get a little experience and ship them out. Most
that came stayed. Stayed through their tour just
like anybody else. I'm really not familiar with
career movements or anything like that, just to
get them a stripe or get them a bar or anything like
that. I'm just not familiar with that. Did you feel
that the tour of duty was 365 days, is that right? Do
you feel that that was too short or should it have
been longer? Well, I was glad it was short. I don't
know of anyone that wasn't glad it was short. But
really, it took a while for the on-the-job
training to take place. So I don't know how much
that affected our capabilities or whatever. But
after two or three months,
we probably maybe should have stayed a little bit
longer. Because it seems like there was always
somebody new. There was always someone around
that was being trained or learning the ropes. So
you never... Seemed like you had a unit that was
working together for a full year. You were always
worrying about somebody new and them learning
ropes and trying to take care of each other. So
maybe it was too short. I really don't know. What
kind of nicknames did y'all have? Did y'all ever
have any kind of pet names? No, not particularly.
We didn't. That's pretty much Hollywood stuff. I
think so. We didn't. I don't know of too many that
did that kind of thing. I was just wondering. Did
you see... A lot of racism among white and black
troops? Not too much. You know, you had some
problems every now and then that would pop up, but
they're the same kinds of problems that would
happen back in the States. You know, and it really
wasn't caused from racism. It was more of anything
caused from tiredness or too many long hours or
getting on each other's nerves. It wasn't so much a
racism type thing. I think the media and movies
have overplayed that aspect of it. I really do.
Now, I may be wrong, but I feel like it's been
overplayed. Now, again, the latter part of the
war, maybe it was more than, like I said, I was there
in 68 and 69, so we were more interested in staying
alive, taking care of each other than worrying
about racism. So the relationship between the
blacks and the whites was good when I was there. We
always had a good relationship. We didn't split
off into little groups or things like that. Was the
relationship between the Americans and the
Vietnamese the same way, or was it a lot different?
No, we didn't really have all that much contact.
The contact we had with civilians was usually
pretty good. We didn't really have any problems
with them. There wasn't a lot of racism between us
and the Vietnamese. Most of the Vietnamese we were
around
needed us. needed the help, whatever. So we didn't
really, I don't recall any real racism against
Vietnamese people, per se. When you got home, how
were you treated? Were you treated a lot
differently than you were before you left? Well,
not particularly as more, I think people wanted to
just forget things. There weren't any kind of
celebrations or anything like that. But other
than that, I never experienced the negative
things you see on TV either. When I came home in 69, I
never encountered anyone that showed me any
disrespect. There wasn't any brass bands, but
there wasn't any riots or criticism or anyone
calling me names or anything like that. So I didn't
experience any of those negative things at home. I
didn't realize that. Do you think that it might
have made a little difference being here in a
conservative part of the country? Probably so. I
think when you're in the conservative South,
I don't know if people are more born to duty or
whatever or loyalty to country or whatever, but I
think coming from a conservative part of the
country, where nationalism is a big part of our
life, played a part in that, as opposed to maybe
growing up in California where it's a much more
liberal society, more liberal values in some of
these other places. I think mostly probably if you
went through the South and the Midwest, I think
probably soldiers may have been viewed a little
bit differently than they were, say, on the West
Coast or possibly even the East Coast. where
people in the large cities, the big states, where
maybe their values are a little bit more liberal
than what we are in the conservative South.
Opinion, I don't know.
Who did you feel was responsible for losing the
war? Or what do you think made them lose the war?
Well, that's a hard one because I think we were
prevented from doing some things that we needed to
do to win the war. I think that Congress, with the
War Powers Act of 1973, kind of put an end to it. We
weren't able to fight the war to help the
Vietnamese continue their Vietnamization
program. So I don't know.
There were just a lot of things that prevented us
from fighting the war and winning it. I think just
mainly keeping us on the defensive was the main
thing that prevented us from winning the war. I had
skipped a question before, but how did you feel
about ARVN when they used their help from the
United States? Do you think they were effective?
Yeah, they were some well-trained and very good,
many were very good fighting men. particularly
the younger ones who were still somewhat
idealistic and wanted to fight for the freedom of
their country and things like that. I think many of
the Arvin soldiers that had been fighting this war
for so many years, 20, 25 years or so, they were just
more intent on survival. But many of the younger
Arvin soldiers, what little bit I know about them
and being a little bit around them, were fighting
the war and they felt like they were doing the right
thing and they were motivated and there was a lot of
patriotism for them in their country. As far as I
know, we worked pretty well together at times. I
never saw any real problem. Did you see corruption
in the structure of their military? Really don't
have any. way of making that call, making that kind
of judgment. I really don't know. Okay.
Let's see. What do you think should have been done
different about Vietnam? I believe I asked you
that already. Well, I just think we should have
went on the offensive and fought the war. And I
think if we would have done that with a weapons and
material, the things that we had, we would have
come out ahead. I don't know why we were prevented
from that, from doing that, what our reasoning
was, but
you can't fight a war from a defensive position. Do
you think that they needed more troops there? I
think we had enough troops. It was just a matter of
using the firepower. And I know you can read all the
books and things about all the bombs that were
dropped and the millions and millions of dollars
and things like that. But I think things might have
been planned a little bit better. Could have been
planned a little bit better. Of course, I'm not
that knowledgeable about what officers and
generals were thinking. But I think most of the
grunts felt like we could do a little bit better job
than we did. in being allowed to fight the war. Do
you have any idea of how that could have been done?
Or no? Well, I think maybe if we'd have went on the
offensive, went on in the north, would have played
a big role. Yeah, going and invading. I think we
might have, it would have cost a lot of lives, but if
we'd have done it in the beginning of the early 60s,
then again, it might have saved a lot of lives. Who
knows? It's just an estimation, just a guess or
whatever. And had we maybe been allowed to go on
into some of these other countries and into the
Vietnam or to the VC camps where they were held up
and not having to hide it from the media and things
of that nature late in the war, like supposedly did
happen, if I'd been on the up and up and went on and
done these things as early as 63 or 64, we might have
prevented a lot of things. Only time will tell or
won't tell. It's just too late to make those kinds
of guesses. With the hindsight that you have, do
you think we still should have gone to Vietnam?
Yes, I think we should have still did that. I'm
disappointed that we didn't finish it like we
should have, but I think we were there in the
beginning for the right reasons. I think those
reasons got blinded somewhere by other things,
maybe financial or whatever,
economy and things of that nature maybe.
Somewhere along in the beginning I think we were
there for the right reasons and it got colored
somehow.
So I take it from what you just said that you would
still have volunteered? I would have done it
again. I still think it was the right thing to do at
that time for me, for me personally. I would have
still done it. Okay. Well, thank you very much. I
appreciate it. You're welcome.